# Lake Mead Steady Inflow Simulations

How long does it take Lake Mead draw down, stabilize, or recover with a steady inflow and starting storage volume? Steady inflow means the same inflow volume year-after-year.

Dr. David Rosenberg
david.rosenberg@usu.edu
September 22, 2021
Utah State University

## Requested Citation
David E. Rosenberg (2021). "[Adapt Lake Mead releases to inflow to give managers more flexibility to slow reservoir draw down.](https://github.com/dzeke/ColoradoRiverCoding/raw/main/BlogDrafts/2-AdaptLakeMeadReleasesToInflowsToGiveManagersMoreFlexibilityToSlowReservoirDrawDown.docx)" Utah State University. Logan, Utah.

## View Results
Open the file **[MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.pdf](https://github.com/dzeke/ColoradoRiverCoding/raw/main/MeadInflowSimulations/MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.pdf)** to view results and an explanation of how results were generated.

## Requirements to Run
* R version 4.1.1. Download from https://cran.r-project.org/.
* R Studio 1.1.456. Download from https://www.rstudio.com/.
* MikTex version 21.12. Download from https://miktex.org/download. (Used to render MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.pdf from the R markdown file MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.Rmd)

## Directions to Generate Results
1. Download and install R, RStudio, and MikTex (see Requirements).
1. Open the **MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.R Project** file. R Studio will open
1. Select the file tab **MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.Rmd**. 
1. On the row below the file tab, click the **Knit** button. The **MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.pdf** file will generate.

## Description
The **MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.Rmd** file generates and outputs the reservoir draw down, equalize, and recover figures to file **MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.pdf**. All additional documentation is 
contained within the PDF file.

## Contents
1. **dfMeadPoolsPlot2.csv** - Lake Mead zones by elevation and name
1. **Fig0-9.jpg** - Figures generated by the file MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.R.
1. **GrandCanyonFlows.csv** - A listing of Grand Canyon and Lee Ferry flows by year from 1905-2016.
1. **HistoricalNaturalFlow.xlsx** - Downloaded from USBR. Used to estimate Grand Canyon tributary and reach gain flows between Powell and Mead. These volumes are then used to translate Mead Inflow into other metrics like Powell Release and Lee Ferry Natural flow
1. **MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.pdf** - PDF file contains all the priniciple outputs and documentation. Generated by running **MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.Rmd**. 
1. **MeadDroughtContingencyPlan.xlsx** - Spreadsheet with Mead and Powell reservoir storage-area-elevation data from CRSS and drought contingency plan schedule (cutbacks vs. Lake Mead elevation)
1. **MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.R** - R version of **MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.Rmd**. There are some differences. There is also some experimental code at the end. The file generates **Fig0-9.jpg**
1. **MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.Rmd** - R markdown file with script to generate **MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.pdf**. **See directions to run this file!**
1. **ShareOfInflow-LB-MX.xlsx** - Excel file calculates shares of inflow for Lower Basin parties and Mexico from customary delivery targets, mandatory conservation volumes, and reservoir elevation. Used in Appendix A of paper.
1. **ShareOfInflow-LB-MX-ByInflowVolume.xlsx** - Excel file calculates shares of inflow as in **ShareOfInflow-LB-MX.xlsx**. Additionally adds worksheets to vary shares proportionately by inflow by priority. Not used in paper.
