# Time to Mead Dead Pool

How long does it take Lake Mead to reach dead pool given a steady inflow and starting storage volume? Steady inflow means the same inflow volume year-after-year.

Dr. David Rosenberg

david.rosenberg@usu.edu

April 3, 2020

Utah State University

## Recommended Citation
David E. Rosenberg (2019). "Time to Mead Dead Pool". Utah State University. Logan, Utah. https://github.com/dzeke/ColoradoRiverFutures.

## Description
**TimeToDeadPool** is a steady deterministic analysis of the number of years for Lake Mead to hit one of the following conditions given a starting storage volume, steady inflow, and steady demand that includes 2019 Drought Contingency Plan reductions when Mead falls
to specified storage levels. Steady inflow means the same inflow volume year after year after year. The stop conditions are to:
1. Dead pool (or other low target elevation specified by the user)
1. Fill  (or other high elevation target specified by the user)
1. Reach an intermediate steady storage volumme (i.e., reservoir neither fills nor goes to dead pool. The volume equilabrates over time)

This analysis is a decision scaling bottom-up multi-dimensional sensitivity analysis ala Brown et al. (2019) where the uncertain dimensions are steady inflow and starting storage and described by scenarios.
The analysis tests combinations of steady inflow and starting storage scenarios.

The analysis can also be used to explore the conseequences of alternative management policies where reservoir release is a function of reservoir storage and inflow (not implemented yet).

## Contents
1. TimeToDeadPool.R - the R code to run (currently has bugs and does not produce all plots shown in folder)
1. Fig0-9.jpg - Figures generated by the TimeToDeadPool code.
1. HistoricalNaturalFlow.xlsx - Downloaded from USBR. Used to estimate Grand Canyon tributary and reach gain flows between Powell and Mead. These volumes are then used to translate Mead Inflow into other metrics like Powell Release and Lee Ferry Natural flow
1. MeadDroughtContingencyPlan.xlsx - Spreadsheet with Mead and Powell reservoir storage-area-elevation data from CRSS and drought contingency plan schedule (cutbacks vs. Lake Mead elevation)
1. MeadSteadyInflowSimulation.pptx - screen grabs of some reservoir storage and release time series plot (see Figg 0-9 above)
1. MeadVulnerability-FlowDurationSeverityStorage.docx - Preliminary write up of methods and results

## Run Code
To run the code, download and install R and RStudio. Open .R Project file, highlight all the code, and run. 
NOTE: Code does not currently work

## To Do
1. Automate results for different reservoir evaporation rates (line 586)
1. Autoamte results to recover from a specified starting storage (line 577)